Add vignette: Python Primer (#1111)
rstudio/reticulate: vignettes/python-primer.Rmd

---
title: "Primer on Python for R Users"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{Primer on Python for R Users}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
editor_options: 
  markdown: 
    wrap: 72
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)
```

```{r setup}
library(reticulate)
```

## Primer on Python for R users

> R is the common language of statistics and data analysis, but it is not

Author: perhaps "R is the preferred language of ..." ?

> R is the common language of statistics and data analysis, but it is not

Reviewer: yeah, well ... for me it's still too strong, but on the other hand, this is directed to R users :-) Also, there's a "but" coming up, so why not, I guess :-)

> R is the common language of statistics and data analysis, but it is not

Author: Re TOC, I think that pkgdown automatically generates a TOC sidebar from the headings, so people will be able to hop around. I also added a teaser sentence in the first paragraph mentioning some of the more nerdy stuff to come...

I'm afraid my ability to distinguish between what's "beginner stuff" and "intermediate" isn't so great here... I placed things in an order that makes sense for me but I'm open to suggestions for reordering.

the only language on the scene. You may find yourself occasionally
wanting to read and understand some Python, or even port some Python to
R. This guide is designed to enable you to do these tasks as quickly as
possible. As you'll see, R and Python are similar enough that it's
possible to do these tasks, without necessarily learning all of Python.

### Whitespace

> Whitespace matters in Python. In R you groups expressions into a code

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whitespace matters in Python. In R, expressions are grouped into a code
```

> block with `{}`, in Python you do that by making the expressions share

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
block with `{}`. In Python, that is done by making the expressions share
```

an indentation level. For example, an expression with an R code block
might be:

```{r}
if (TRUE) {
  cat("This is one expression. \n")
  cat("This is another expression. \n")
}
```

The equivalent in Python:

```{python}
if True:
  print("This is one expression.")

>   print("This is another expression.")

Reviewer 2: Do we need to talk about indenting with spaces versus tabs here?

Author: Thanks! I added two sentences on tabs vs spaces.

```

> ### Container Types

Reviewer 3: Would it make sense to talk about `reticulate` casting rules in this section. Ie, what happens with R lists/named lists when they are passed to python.

Author: Thanks, I added a sentence in the section on dictionaries about this.

In R, the `list()` is a container you can use to organize R objects. R's
`list()` is feature packed, and there is actually no single direct
equivalent in Python that supports all the same features. Instead there
are (at least) 4 different Python container types you need to be aware
of: lists, dictionaries, tuples, and sets.

#### Lists

Python lists are typically created using bare brackets `[]`. The Python
built-in `list()` function is more of a coercion function, closer in
spirit to R's `as.list()`. The most important thing to know about Python
lists is that they are modified in place. Note in the example below that
`y` reflects the changes made to `x`, because the underlying list object
which both symbols point to is modified in place.

```{python}
x = [1, 2, 3]

> y = x

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
y = x   # `y` and `x` now refer to the same list!
```

typically constructed using bare `()`, but parentheses are not strictly
required, and you may see an implicit tuple being defined just from a
comma separated series of expressions. Because parentheses can also be
used to group expressions to define order of operations in expressions
like `(x + 3) * 4`, a special syntax is required to define tuples of
length 1: a trailing comma. Tuples are most commonly encountered in
functions that take a variable number of arguments.

```{python}
x = (1, 2) # tuple of length 2
type(x)
len(x)
x

x = (1,) # tuple of length 1
type(x)
len(x)
x

x = () # tuple of length 0
print(f"{type(x) = }; {len(x) = }; {x = }")
# example of an interpolated string literals

x = 1, 2 # also a tuple
type(x)
len(x)

x = 1, # beware a single trailing comma! This is a tuple!
type(x)
len(x)
```

##### Packing and Unpacking

Tuples are the container that powers the *packing* and *unpacking*
semantics in Python. Python provides the convenience of allowing you to
assign multiple symbols in one expression.

For example:

```{python}
x = (1, 2, 3)
a, b, c = x
a
b
c
```

(You can access similar unpacking behavior from R using
`` zeallot::`%<-%` ``).

> Tuple unpacking can occur in multiple contexts, such as iteration:

Author: Good suggestion! I added another example about nested unpacking

```{python}
xx = (("a", 1),
      ("b", 2))
for x1, x2 in xx:
  print("x1 = ", x1)
  print("x2 = ", x2)

```

If you attempt to unpack a container to the wrong number of symbols,
Python raises an error:

```{python, error = TRUE}
x = (1, 2, 3)
a, b, c = x # success
a, b = x    # error, x has too many values to unpack
a, b, c, d = x # error, x has not enough values to unpack
```

It is possible to unpack a variable number of arguments, using `*` as a
prefix to a symbol. (You'll see the `*` prefix again when we talk about
functions)

```{python}
x = (1, 2, 3)
a, *the_rest = x
a
the_rest
```

#### Dictionaries

> Dictionaries are most similar to R's named lists. They are a container

Author: Thank you, that's the better comparison.

where you can retrieve items by name, though in Python the name (called
a *key* in Python's parlance) does not need to be a string like in R. It
can be any Python object with a `hash()` method (meaning, it can be
almost any Python object). They can be created using syntax like
`{key: value}`. Like Python lists, they are modified in place.

```{python}
d = {"key1": 1,
     "key2": 2}
d2 = d
d
d["key1"]
d["key3"] = 3
d2 # modified in place!
```

Unlike R's named lists, you cannot index into a dictionary with an
integer to get an item at a specific index position. Dictionaries are

> *unordered* containers. (However---beginning with Python 3.7,

Author: It's guaranteed, in the language spec now!

dictionaries do preserve the item insertion order).

```{python, error = TRUE}
d = {"key1": 1, "key2": 2}
d[1] # error
```

> A container that closest matches the semantics of R's named list is the

Author: It was much more common in Python 2 code, but since that change in Py 3.7, it seems to be waning in favor. I added a link to https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html#collections.OrderedDict, for the motivated readers :)

container.

```{python}
for x in [1, 2, 3]:
  print(x)
```

R has a relatively limited set of objects that can be passed to `for`.
Python by comparison, provides an iterator protocol interface, which
means that authors can define custom objects, with custom behavior that
is invoked by `for`. (We'll have an example for how to define a custom
iterable when we get to classes). You may want to use a Python iterable
from R using reticulate, so it's helpful to peel back the syntactic
sugar a little to show what the `for` statement is doing in Python, and
how you can step through it manually.

There are two things that happen: first, an iterator is constructed from
the supplied object. Then, the new iterator object is repeatedly called
with `next()` until it is exhausted.

```{python, error = TRUE}
l = [1, 2, 3]
it = iter(l) # create an iterator object
it

# call `next` on the iterator until it is exhausted:
next(it)
next(it)
next(it)
next(it)
```

In R, you can use reticulate to step through an iterator the same way.

```{r}
library(reticulate)
l <- r_to_py(list(1, 2, 3))
it <- as_iterator(l)

iter_next(it)
iter_next(it)
iter_next(it)

> iter_next(it, completed = "StopIteration")

Reviewer 3: Maybe also mention the `coro::loop` syntax here?

Author: Thanks! I added a mention about coro::loop in a later "final remarks on iteration" section.

```

Iterating over dictionaries first requires understanding if you are
iterating over the keys, values, or both. Dictionaries have methods that
allow you to specify which.

```{python}
d = {"key1": 1, "key2": 2}
for key in d:
  print(key)

for value in d.values():
  print(value)

for key, value in d.items():
  print(key, ":", value)
```

#### Comprehensions

Comprehensions are special syntax that allow you to construct a
container like a list or a dict, while also executing a small operation

> or single expression on each element. You can think of it as special

Author: Interesting! using the word 'set' here feels a little dangerous, since it's not `set` type.... (Also, as I think on it, math sets can be infinite, but python comprehensions don't support `break`....)

syntax for R's `lapply`.

For example:

```{python}
x = [1, 2, 3]

# a list comprehension built from x, where you add 100 to each element
l = [element + 100 for element in x]
l

# a dict comprehension built from x, where the key is a string.
# Python's str() is like R's as.character()
d = {str(element) : element + 100
     for element in x}
d
```

### Defining Functions with `def`

> Python functions are defined with the `def` statement. The syntax for

Reviewer 3: I think it's worth mentioning that Python functions require a `return` statement.

Author: Thanks! Good point.

specifying function arguments and default values is very similar to R.

```{python}
def my_function(name = "World"):
  print("Hello", name)

my_function()
my_function("Friend")
```

The equivalent R snippet would be

```{r}
my_function <- function(name = "World") {
  cat("Hello", name, "\n")
}

my_function()
my_function("Friend")
```

(Note for advanced R users: Python has no equivalent of R's argument

> "promises". Function argument default values are evaluated once, when

Author: I think the convention is to typically set the default value to `None`, and then change it in the function body if it needs to be some kind of complicated or mutable object.

is requisite knowledge, because `class`'s are how you organize and find
methods in Python. (In contrast to R's S3 approach, where methods are
found by dispatching from a generic). Fortunately, the basics of
`class`'s are accessible.

Don't be intimidated if this is your first exposure to object oriented
programming. We'll start by building up a simple Python class for
demonstration purposes.

```{python}
class MyClass:
  pass # `pass` means do nothing.

MyClass
type(MyClass)

instance = MyClass()
instance
type(instance)
```

Like the `def` statement, the `class` statement binds a new callable
symbol, `MyClass`. First note the strong naming convention, classes are
typically `CamelCase`, and functions are typically `snake_case`. After
defining `MyClass`, you can interact with it, and see that it has type
`'type'`. Calling `MyClass()` creates a new object **instance** of the
class, which has type `'MyClass'` (ignore the `__main__.` prefix for
now). The instance prints with its memory address, which is a strong
hint that it's common to be managing many instances of a class.

In the first example, we defined an empty `class`, but when we inspect

> it we see that it already comes with a bunch of attributes (`dir()` in

Author: All methods are accessible as attributes (said another way, a method is any attribute that was a function when the `class` was constructed, since that's when all the `self` partialing magic happens).... Not sure where to work that in exactly. Perhaps a (new) subsection on attributes?

> it we see that it already comes with a bunch of attributes (`dir()` in

Reviewer: that would be great!

means that the token invokes a Python language feature. Some dunder
tokens are merely ways code authors can plug into specific syntactic
sugars, others are values provided by the interpreter that would be
otherwise hard to acquire, yet others are for extending language
interfaces (e.g., the iteration protocol), and finally, a small handful
of dunders are truly complicated to understand. Fortunately, as an R
user looking to use some Python features through reticulate, you only
need to know about a few easy-to-understand dunders.

The most common dunder method you'll encounter when reading Python code
is `__init__()`. This is a function that is called when the class
constructor is called, that is, when a class is **instantiated**. It is
meant to initialize the new class instance. (In very sophisticated code
bases, you may also encounter classes where `__new__` is also defined,
this is called before `__init__`).

```{python}
class MyClass:

  print("MyClass's definition body is being evaluated")

  def __init__(self):
    print(self, "is initializing")

print("MyClass is finished being created")

instance = MyClass()
print(instance)

instance2 = MyClass()
print(instance2)
```

> A few things to note:

Author: Interesting! I purposely took it a little slow here. I was worried it maybe a little surprising for R users that a `class` code block is executed only once. Otherwise, people might expect something similar to `def` semantics, where the code block is executed on each call. Also, once you know a class definition is executed only once, the fact that anything defined in the class body is shared by all the instances is a realization that naturally follows....

> A few things to note:

Reviewer: hm, seems like I think differently about this ... I mean, a function _definition_ is also executed just once, right?
But maybe it's just that my first programming language really was Java that makes me find it obvious that a class is defined once ...

    other function. Except it's inside the class body.

-   `__init__` take an argument: `self`. `self` is the class instance
    being initialized (note the identical memory address between `self`
    and `instance`). Also note that we didn't provide `self` when call
    `MyClass()` to create the class instance, `self` was spliced into
    the function call by the interpreter.

-   `__init__` is called each time a new instance is created.

Functions defined inside a `class` code block are called *methods*, and
the important thing to know about methods is that each time they are
called from a class instance, the instance is spliced into the function
call as the first argument. This applies to all functions defined in a
class, including dunders. (The sole exception is if the function is
decorated with something like `@classmethod` or `@staticmethod`).

```{python, error = TRUE}
class MyClass:
  def a_method(self):
    print("self.a_method() was called with", self)

inst = MyClass()
inst.a_method()

MyClass.a_method()     # error, missing required argument `self`
MyClass.a_method(inst) # identical to inst.a_method()
```

> Other dunder's worth knowing about are:

Reviewer: nice listing!

a `__next__` method, whose job is to return the next element each time
it is called, and then raises a `StopIteration` exception once it's
exhausted.

It's common to see classes that are both iterables and iterators, where
the `__iter__` method is just a stub that returns `self`.

Here is a custom iterable / iterator implementation of Python's `range`
(similar to `seq` in R)

```{python, error = TRUE}
class MyRange:
  def __init__(self, start, end):
    self.start = start
    self.end = end

  def __iter__(self):
    # reset our counter.
    self._index = self.start - 1
    return self

  def __next__(self):
    if self._index < self.end:
      self._index += 1 # increment
      return self._index
    else:
      raise StopIteration

for x in MyRange(1, 3):
  print(x)

# doing what `for` does, but manually
r = MyRange(1, 3)
it = iter(r)
next(it)
next(it)
next(it)
next(it)
```

### Decorators

Decorators are just functions that take a function as an argument and
then return a function. Any function can be invoked as a decorator with
the `@` syntax, which is just sugar for this simple action:

```{python}
def my_decorator(func):

>   func.x = "a decorator modified this function by adding an attribute `x`"

Reviewer: could this be made even simpler? Perhaps by removing the added attribute? So that it's even more clear that it's just a function call, basically...?

Author: Are you suggesting an identity function? I was looking for some minimal, simple-to-understand thing that demonstrates that decorators typically do *something* ... assigning an attribute seemed like the most accessible operation that came to mind. I don't want to go full bore and start talking about closures or all the machinery in `functools`...

Reviewer: yeah... maybe i was thinking of something as simple as calling` tf_function()` ;-))) But you're right, adding an attriute makes sense.

  return func

def my_function(): pass
my_function = my_decorator(my_function)

# @ is just fancy syntax for the above two lines
@my_decorator
def my_function(): pass
```

One decorator you might encounter frequently is:

-   `@property`, which automatically calls a class method when the
    attribute is accessed (similar to `makeActiveBinding()` in R).

### Defining Generators with `yield`.

Generators are special Python functions that contain one or more `yield`
statements. As soon as `yield` is included in a code block passed to
`def`, the semantics change substantially. You're no longer defining a
mere function, but a generator constructor! In turn, calling a generator

> constructor creates a generator object, which is just another type of

Reviewer: generator object == generator _class_, is that correct?

Author: I *think* so. 
My impression is that the terminology gets a little imprecise here the way it's used in the broader world. In many places people seem to interchangeably use the bare word "generator" for both the 'generator constructor' and the 'generator iterator' (which self-identifies as a 'generator object' when printed at the REPL, and `<class 'generator'>` when queried with `type()`).

Reviewer: yeah, I see, terminology stuff ... here too, probably preferences are determined by how one was "socialized" ... plus, the terms you use there are pretty clear

iterator.

Here is an example:

```{python, error = TRUE}
def my_generator_constructor():
  yield 1
  yield 2
  yield 3

# At first glance it presents like a regular function
my_generator_constructor
type(my_generator_constructor)

# But calling it returns something special, a 'generator object'
my_generator = my_generator_constructor()
my_generator
type(my_generator)

# The generator object is both an iterable and an iterator
# it's __iter__ method is just a stub that returns `self`
iter(my_generator) == my_generator == my_generator.__iter__()

# step through it like any other iterator
next(my_generator)
my_generator.__next__() # next() is just sugar for calling the dunder
next(my_generator)
next(my_generator)
```

> Encountering `yield` is like hitting the pause button on a functions

Reviewer: nice analogy!

-   floating-point types can represent any number, but with some degree
    of imprecision.

In R, writing a bare literal number like `12` produces a floating point
type, whereas in Python, it produces an integer. You can produce an
integer literal in R by appending an `L`, as in `12L`. Many Python
functions expect integers, and will error when provided a float.

For example, say we have a Python function that expects an integer:

```{python}
def a_strict_Python_function(x):
  assert isinstance(x, int), "x is not an int"
  print("Yay! x was an int")
```

When calling it from R, you must be sure to call it with an integer:

```{r}
library(reticulate)
py$a_strict_Python_function(3) |> try()    # error
py$a_strict_Python_function(3L)            # success
py$a_strict_Python_function(as.integer(3)) # success
```

### What about R vectors?

R is a language designed for numerical computing first. Vector data
types are baked deep into the R language, to the point that the language
doesn't even distinguish scalars from vectors. By comparison, numerical
computing features in Python are generally provided by third party
packages (*modules*, in Python parlance). The closest equivalent to an R

> numeric vector is a numpy array, or sometimes, a Python list of numerics

Author: I reordered some the sections so modules are discussed before vectors, and reworded this paragraph a little too (Sigrid also flagged this)

(some Pythonistas might argue for `array.array()` here, but that's so
rarely encountered in actual Python code we don't mention it further).
Teaching the NumPy interface is beyond the scope of this tutorial, but
it's worth pointing out some potential tripping hazards for users
accustomed to R arrays:

> -   When indexing into multidimensional numpy arrays, trailing

Reviewer: I was wondering if it'd make sense to even start talking about numpy here ... on the other hand, that point is totally worth making, - again one super confusing thing when seen from "outside" ...

Author: Thanks! Kevin also honed in on the way Numpy is introduced. I re-ordered sections so that module are talked about first, before vectors, and I word-smithed this a little too.

    dimensions can be omitted and are implicitly treated as missing. The
    consequence is that iterating over arrays means iterating over the
    first dimension. For example, this iterates over the rows of a
    matrix.

```{python}
import numpy as np
m = np.arange(12).reshape((3,4))
m
m[0]    # first row
m[0, :] # also first row

for row in m:
  print(row)
```

-   Many numpy operations modify the array in place! This is surprising
    to R users, who are used to the convenience and safety of R's
    copy-on-modify semantics. Unfortunately, there is no simple scheme
    or naming convention you can rely on to quickly determine if a
    particular method modifies in-place or creates a new array copy. The
    only reliable way is to consult the
    [documentation](https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/index.html#reference),

>     and conduct small experiments at the `reticulate::python_repl()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    and conduct small experiments at the `reticulate::repl_python()`.
```

### `import` and Modules

In R, authors can bundle their code into shareable extensions called R
packages, and R users can access objects from R packages via `library()`
or `::`. In Python, authors bundle code into *modules*, and users access
modules using `import`. Consider the line:

```{python}
import numpy
```

This statement has Python go out to the file system, find an installed

> Python module named 'numpy', load it (commonly meaning: evaluate it's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Python module named 'numpy', load it (commonly meaning: evaluate its
```

    chdir(self.new_wd)

  def __exit__(self, *args):
    # __exit__ takes some additional argument that are commonly ignored
    chdir(self.original_wd)

getcwd()
with wd_context(".."):
  print("in the context, wd is:", getcwd())
getcwd()
```

### Learning More

Hopefully, this short primer to Python has provided a good foundation
for confidently reading Python documentation and code, and using Python
modules from R via reticulate. Of course, there is much, much more to
learn about Python. Googling questions about Python reliably brings up
pages of results, but not always sorted in order of most useful. Blog
posts and tutorials targeting beginners can be valuable, but remember
that Python's official documentation is generally excellent, and it
should be your first destination when you have questions.

<https://docs.Python.org/3/>

<https://docs.Python.org/3/library/index.html>

To learn Python more fully, the built-in official tutorial is also
excellent and comprehensive (but does require a time commitment to get
value out of it) <https://docs.Python.org/3/tutorial/index.html>

Finally, don't forget to solidify your understanding by conducting small

> experiments at the `reticulate::python_repl()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
experiments at the `reticulate::repl_python()`.
```
